---
title: 'Find your tribe - why developers need their crew'
updateDate: 2023-08-24
publishDate: 2023-08-24
image: 'team-4.jpg'
tags: ['community']
author: darko-bozhinovski
canonicalUrl: 'https://darko.io/posts/find-your-tribe'
excerpt: 'On the importance of being part of a community as a developer.'
---

<i>This article is inspired by a panel I participated in at WeAreDevelopers
World Congress 2023.
[A buffalo stick take](https://jason.energy/effective-devrel-buffalo-stick/) on
a panel, if you will.</i>

Without getting too heavily into stereotypes, we developers tend towards being
on the "wallflower" side of the spectrum. I'm no exception, even though
[I'm actively taking](https://beerjs.mk) [part in some](https://codepub.dev)
[not-so-introverted](https://deved.mk)
[activities](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCtCyVHiEXMOHaVGbnKuU4VA). That's
all good and well, but we are naturally social beings. Especially when it comes
to problem-solving, learning, and sharing knowledge, it stands to reason that by
collaborating with others, we can achieve more than we can on our own. Let's
dive into why it's important to be part of a community as a developer.

## The selfish angle

I will try building an answer for this from the "selfish" point of view, i.e.,
what's in it for you as an individual. To me, the primary value of being a part
of a community is having a network of support and a group to rely on. Let's
explore what this means in practice.

### Having a network (of support)

The more connections you have, the more opportunities you'll have. Communities
of like-minded individuals are precisely the place to build these connections.
These opportunities can vary from finding a new job, finding a freelance gig, or
collaborating on something (FOSS or otherwise). Additionally, whenever you get
stuck on a problem or need a second opinion, you can always reach out to the
group for help. If, at any point in this paragraph, you thought, "but this
sounds like a company" - you're right. A company is also a community in many
senses but with the profit motive added on top. It's a group of people working
together towards a common goal. The difference is that the goal is not to make
money but to help each other out (even though some collabs can lead to making
money).

The two primary transactions one can make in a community are sharing what they
know and learning something from the group. Let's go deeper into each and see
how they can benefit you.

#### Learning from others (and getting info in general)

There's always something new to learn, whether you're just starting or are
longer in the tooth. While no two people learn the same way, having someone to
ask always helps, or having a group of someones to ask, for that matter.

When it comes to development, whether you're starting on a new library/framework
or you're stuck deep into [Heisenbug](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heisenbug)
land, technical documentation, videos or blogs can only get you so far. At some
point, you're bound to hit a wall with something ill-documented, maybe a new bug
or something else. You may be on the fence about whether to use a particular
tech. Or you might need a recommendation on what to use for your next app. These
situations are exactly where having a community to ask for help can be a
lifesaver.

Another point I'd like to make here is the one about getting information in
general, not just for the sake of learning. Most of my freelance gigs, projects,
and employment opportunities have come from people I know professionally. And
most of the people I know professionally are from the communities I'm a part of.
This is not to say you should join a community just to get a job. But it's a
nice side effect of being a part of one.

#### Sharing your knowledge (and work)

One of the easiest ways to get noticed and build a brand for yourself is by
sharing what you know. What you share can be in the form of blog posts, videos,
talks, or even just tweets. The more you share, the more people know about you
and your work. This can lead to more opportunities, as mentioned above. But it
can also lead to more people reaching out to you for help. That is a great way
to build your network and get to know more people. And, as we've established,
having a network is a good thing. Online communities are an excellent place to
share your work and knowledge. They're also a great place to get feedback on
your work and knowledge. This can help you improve and grow as a developer.

However, it's important to note that sharing just for the sake of sharing isn't
too valuable. The content you create, find, curate, and share should be relevant
to the community you choose to be a part of. Otherwise, you're just spamming.
And nobody likes spam. Put another way, you should share things you would like
to see in the community. Stuff that's valuable to you and that you think will be
valuable to others. Finding out what that is can be tricky and can take some
time. But it's worth it. Experiment to see what people react to. Iterate.

The bottom line is that you can view a community as a "stage" of sorts‚Äîa place
where you can share your work, build in public, and build a personal brand. If
you're uncomfortable with that, you can always just lurk and learn. But I'd
encourage you to try and share something. You'll be surprised at how much you
can learn from the feedback you get. Additionally, people tend to share what
they like and find value in. So, if you hit that value sweet spot (and that's a
matter of iteration), you'll get more people to share your work. This can lead
to more opportunities, as mentioned above.

Had enough of the "selfish" angle? Let's look at the other side of the coin.

## The other side of the coin

There are plenty of benefits to being a part of a community as an individual.
But there are also a lot of benefits to the community itself. The point I'd like
to make here is that being an (active) community member is a win-win scenario.
Beyond the "free audience" point we made above, there's something to be said
about the community as an organism.

Consider this - if each member started from the "selfish" point of view, this is
still a win-win scenario for everyone involved. None of us know everything
(alone). Those who know a particular thing can share for their benefit and the
"free stage" thing. Those who seek knowledge can learn. It's a symbiotic system.
And it's a system that can grow and evolve.

### The collective consciousness

One of the more nuanced perks of being part of a community is the collective
mindset. The insights, the shared experiences, the common challenges - it all
coalesces into a unified understanding of the tech world. When you are part of a
tribe, you aren't just getting direct feedback or assistance; you're tapping
into a vast reservoir of collective experiences.

Have you ever found an obscure forum post from 2006 that somehow solves your
current tech problem? Yep, that's the power of community memory. Being part of
an active community today means creating the resources that someone might find
invaluable a decade from now.

### The ripple effect

An active contribution to a community sets off a ripple. Share a workaround for
a stubborn glitch today, and you might inspire someone else to create a more
streamlined solution tomorrow. This cyclic inspiration keeps the community
vibrant and progressive.

### Giving back ‚Äì the circle of (tech) life

Remember that win-win scenario? The community gives, and you benefit. But
there's another layer to this: when you give back, the cycle continues. Whether
it's mentoring a newbie, organizing an event, or simply upvoting a helpful
comment ‚Äì it's a way of acknowledging the value you've derived and ensuring the
community's heartbeat remains strong.

### The synergy

Perhaps one of the most compelling aspects of being in a community is the
synergy. When developers come together, they don‚Äôt just add their expertise ‚Äì
they multiply it. New collaborations, side projects, or even startups often
emerge from the explosive mix of ideas and aspirations.

## Experiences from the field

[In one of the paragraphs above](#having-a-network-of-support), I mentioned that
companies are also communities. The same goes for research institutes,
universities, and other organizations. I've been a part of a few of these, and
I've seen the benefits first-hand. Being a huge fan(boy) of the work of Bell
Labs and the UNIX philosophy, I found that this video by
[Richard Hamming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Hamming) makes some
great points about the benefits of being a part of a community (and a lot of
other ones too). I'd encourage you to watch it.

<iframe
  width='100%'
  style='aspect-ratio: 16/9'
  src='https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/a1zDuOPkMSw'
  title='You and Your research'
  frameborder='0'
  allow='accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share'
  allowfullscreen
></iframe>

The two most relevant points to this article are (but seriously, go watch it -
it's excellent üòÅ):

- **Share and Collaborate**: Hamming stressed that working in isolation limits
  potential. Sharing ideas, collaborating with peers, and being open to feedback
  can significantly elevate the quality and reach of your work.
- **Environment Matters**: Being in the right environment, surrounded by
  motivated and intelligent people, can catalyze success. It's not just about
  individual brilliance but also the collective intellect and drive of those
  around you.

While I've soloed a part of my career, I've done some of my best work when being
a part of a group that shares vision, values, and ideas. I've had the fortune of
doing _actual_ R&D work, where we were given a problem and left to our own
devices to solve it. It wasn't supposed to be a product, but something that may
eventually become one. While being able to focus on a problem without having
hard time constraints is fantastic, the environment and the people I worked with
made it productive. I firmly believe we got much more done as a group than we
would have individually. And each of us had a video transcoder app/cli/service
to show for it, implemented independently (but that's an even longer story for
another time). Still, it was because of that environment (and community), that
we were able to solve problems as a relatively small team, that nobody else
wanted to tackle. Some of the stuff we were able to produce: a chromecast clone
(way before chromecast was a thing), a distributed transcoding service, an
embedded video player (html5 video wasn't a thing back then) using NPAPI, a
peer-to-peer CDN thing based on aria2c using BitTorrent... those were the days.
In many senses, what we did reflected in many ways the freedom described by Bell
Labs folks. To avoid going off on a tangent here, I'll leave it at this - the
environment and the people you work with matter. A lot. Same goes for
communities and being a part of a community as a developer.

Back to Bell Labs, it's hard to find a talk or an interview from anyone who was
part of the golden days of Bell Labs without them mentioning that, in many ways,
the extraordinary work being done there had to do with the environment and being
surrounded by like-minded people. Sounds like a community, doesn't it? They have
the most Nobel and Turing awards of any company/research institute to date.

## Wrapping up

While the benefits of being part of a developer community are many, the essence
is simple: find your tribe, connect, share, and grow. Remember, tech trends
might come and go, but the relationships you cultivate within your community can
last a lifetime (and come back in unexpected ways to help you produce great
things).

So, if you're on the fence about joining one, remember this: every line of code
is a statement, every shared solution a conversation. Why not make it a shared
experience with a tribe that resonates with your vibe? Dive in and embrace the
collective journey.

---

#### PS. A call to action

Have some trouble finding the right community for you?

If you're looking for an in-person one, do a quick search on Meetup, Facebook,
etc. If you're into JS land, try finding a local
[BeerJS branch](https://github.com/beerjs/meta) or start one yourself (it's
really fun and easy). [Here's mine](https://beerjs.mk) if you happen to be in my
corner of the planet.

If you're into online ones, here's my favorite -> https://creatures.sh. It's a
community of curious developers excited about code, but that description doesn't
do it justice or describe what it's all about. Join and see for yourself üòé
